---
title: Jujitsu
description: Using Jujitsu at work
date: 2026-03-02
tags: blog
---

I've been using git for a while, I opened my GitHub in January of 2014, when I was about 14 years old.
My first contribution was to [ranui](https://github.com/sakamies/ranui), about a year later.
I contributed to open source projects in my teens, and worked on a lot of small hobby projects that were just my own, all in git, uploaded to GitHub (there was a brief GitLab phase, but it didn't last long).

I never completely understood version control though, it was just a necessity.
Software developers use git, I wanted to be a software developer, so, I used git.
Last year, I started my first "real" software job out of college.
The project had me, another new developer, and a senior dev working part time.

I had fewer people to ask about the codebase than any project in the past.
Suddenly, version control became much, much more useful.
At the same time, my contributions played a much larger role than any other project I'd contributed to, and it made more sense to document each change I made along the way.
The senior developer on the project pushed us to make clean commit trees.
I quickly understood the value, just in getting up to speed on the codebase I could feel how much a good version history mattered.
So, I started pruning my commit graphs.
The commit history in my pull requests wasn't just a log of changes I had made anymore, I tried to make them tell a coherent story.

I struggled with the git CLI, though, so I used git-branchless. <!-- TODO: cite -->
It let me undo changes, and move commits around easily.
It felt more like writing a proof, rather than just showing my work: I had a problem, and here's each step along the way to solve it. 
Now, I could easily create commit graphs intended for future developers, not just a list of save states.

Eventaully git branchless got too slow, though, I had heard a lot of buzz about Jujitsu, so I decided to give it a try.
It took a few attempts to properly integrate it into my workflow, I didn't want to slow down during the day, so I thew it out if it ever caused problems.
After a few attempts though, it stuck.

Jujitsu gives me a feeling of control over the version control system I was lacking in git.
I'm far from an advanced user, my understanding is just as rudimentary as git - but a few commands go a long way.
If I make too many changes, and want split them across a few commits, I use `jj split`, and get an interactive view in my terminal to split the current change in two.
If I need to move the current commit before the previous, I run `jj rebase -r @ --insert-before @-`.
I have the same `undo` functionality as with git-branchless, but it's faster and corrolates more closely to the actual commands I issued.
Finally, I don't have to worry about my working copy.
Many, many times I've been working on my own code, decide to go do code review and I can seamlessly switch to my coworker's branch with `jj new AB-123_...` and my own changes are left intact.

I don't understand the internals of Jujisu (or git, for that matter). When I run a command with `jj` though, I don't feel like I need to.
Jujisu maps well to my mental model of what a distributed version control system should be.
I can easily split, squash, and reorder commits without fear.
The CLI is simple, fast and it lets you move quickly, and it's fully compatible with git.
I can't speak to the internals of Jujisu, as I don't fully understand them, but I can use it effectively nonethless.